Academia has kind of a weird leadership
structure. So, you're employed by your
advisor. So, you kind of have to do
whatever your advisor tells you to do
cuz you're getting paid by them. But, at
the same time, you're kind of working
for yourself as well. So, in most jobs,
you will you can just do whatever your
manager tells you to do. So as long as
you perform the tasks you are uh you are
you are paid to perform uh and you do
those to the best of your abilities it's
fine but in academia as a PhD student
and as postoc your results directly
affect your future opportunities.
So,
let's say your advisor gives you a lot
of projects that doesn't work and he
can't really advise you and he wastes a
bunch of your time and and you have
ambitions to stay in academia and be
eventually become a professor. Now,
you're not publishing and that's no
longer an option for you cuz you didn't
publish. You didn't perform and so now
you no longer have that option. So your
results
directly uh translates into your future
opportunities. Whilst for the professor
who gives the who makes the projects,
he has a lot of other PhD students and
postocs who also do research for him. So
as long as someone is uh producing
results, it doesn't really matter that
much to him if you you are.
And so his risk is spread out over over
a lot of people whilst your risk is much
for yourself is much greater. Another
important aspect is that if you're a PhD
student, you have to get your degree.
And your advisor is basically the one
who decides whether or not you get your
degree. If you don't get your degree in
a PhD program, all that work was for
nothing. And this kind of grows as you
progress in your PhD because the longer
time you spend in the program, the more
time you will have wasted if you don't
actually get your degree. And so the the
power your advisor has over you is
increasing as you go along, the f the
deeper you go into the program. whilst
in a regular job you can at least in
theory just quit and get another job and
it won't have any negative consequences
to you. Another thing that really
affects the the power dynamic in
academia is especially as a as a PhD
student, a lot of people who start the
PhD have limited life experience
and so they don't know necessarily
what's acceptable behavior and what's
not in the workplace. There's also been
created a narrative that as a PhD
student, you should be overworked and
underpaid and you should be ready to be
abused basically. And this narrative
also really affects the power dynamic as
a lot of people think that they have to
work all these hours, they have to do
all these things because otherwise
you're not hardcore or you're not cut
out to be a PhD. And a lot of students
who start their PhD admires professors
and their advisor specifically because
they have achieved the things that they
dream of achieving. But what you have to
realize is that this person is just a
human. They're not anything special.
They just know a lot or at least
hopefully they just know a lot about the
thing that you want to learn a lot
about. Another thing that really
contributes to this power imbalance is
that universities often invest quite a
lot in professors and professors bring
them grant money. So often times the un
most of the time universities actually
make money off of professors
whilst PhD students are viewed as purely
an expense by universities. Of course,
no research would ever get done without
students and postocs, but it still means
that the university will in most cases
take the side of the professor in a
conflict. And so if the professor is to
be reprimanded or even removed from his
position,
what he does needs to be very bad. And
this really creates an insane power
dynamic.
So it seems like professors can get away
with almost anything and they are going
to be protected no matter what.
Uh and so if you're someone who really
wants to bully people and own people and
make people's lives miserable, there
really isn't a better job than
professor, I think. And so in in
reality, this is a dream job for a
psychopath. And of course by psychopath
I don't mean a clinical term. I mean
someone with a high degree of narcissism
and a low degree of empathy. And that's
why I think you'll find a lot of people
who have had negative experiences during
your PhD because there is this job seems
to attract quite a lot of these kinds of
people or at least it can create an
environment where these people or people
with these traits these traits gets
exaggerated because they're in an
environment where they're idolized and
they're they have kind of ultimate power
and they can do whatever they want and
maybe
some of these traits gets enhanced by
this environment.
So if I was to give advice on how to
avoid these people as uh as a student, I
would say if you see this kind of
behavior, if you see traits like this,
don't think don't mistake it for
ambition or that it's some kind of
behavior to admire. Cuz I've seen people
really burn themselves on this before. I
have seen professors who are clearly not
a nice person and people still choose
them as their advisor because they think
that it means it tells them something
admiral about them. And what often ends
up happening is that they either switch
professors or they drop out of the
program entirely. That's the first and
most important advice I would say.
Another thing is don't idolize your
advisor. Just because someone is a
professor, it just means that they
probably knows a lot about something. It
doesn't mean that they're perfect in
every aspect of life. And it doesn't
mean that you should necessarily listen
to them uh when they're talking about
things outside of their specialty area.
So yeah, don't idolize them. Don't don't
think of them as a god. They're just a
human being and they're not perfect. And
finally, I will say this that
you may think that they have this
ultimate power and that they can just
fire you if uh if you're not living up
to expectations.
The fact of the matter is in most cases
you're actually employed by the
university and they don't have any
direct way of firing you.
Another thing is that
they would in most cases be stupid to
fire you because you are very cheap
labor in most cases. And
at least here in Scandinavia, you uh the
money that you are the money that they
have are allocated to you. So if they
fire you, if you get fired, that project
is gone. There is they can't hire anyone
else on that money. So it's like that
would be a complete waste for them. Uh
and so even if the culture in the group
is to work 80hour weeks
that doesn't mean you have to. And as
long as you
produce, as long as you produce uh
as much as you'd expect, as you should
be able to expect, and in most cases, a
lot of a lot of the time you'll be able
to produce just as much as the others,
working fewer hours because
people may not want to admit it, but in
many cases, you work less efficiently if
you are
going beyond the limit of what you can
recover from. So, if you're working 80
hours a week, maybe you're not producing
for much more than 40 hours. Now, a lot
of people will claim that it does this
doesn't apply to them, but at least in
my experience, it applies to me. And I
never felt like I was producing less
than people who were working a lot more
than me. Of course, your adviser can
make your life miserable,
so you should try to keep them as happy
as you can, but don't burn yourself out
uh
by letting them abuse you. Okay, but I
think that's uh that's all for this
video. If you want to watch some of my
other content, it's all there. and I'll
see you in the next